docs: add technical reference document for Magma metrics (#8115)
magma/magma: docs/readmes/resources/ref_magma_metrics.md

---
id: ref_magma_metrics
title: Life of a Magma Metric
hide_title: true
---

# Life of a Magma Metric

> A metric in a Magma deployment may originate at the access gateway (AGW), other gateways such as FeG, at the orchestrator (Orc8r), or at other targets such as Postgres. In this document, we focus on the life of a metric that originates at the AGW, goes through the Orc8r to [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/), and eventually gets displayed on the NMS UI.

Reviewer: If someone's reading this, they know what the abbreviations mean by now
```suggestion
A metric in Magma deployments may originate at gateways (AGW, FeG, etc.), Orc8r, or other targets (Postgres, AWS, etc.). In this document, we focus on the life of a metric that originates at the AGW, travels through the Orc8r to [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/), and is eventually displayed on the NMS UI.
```

```python
# client.py

logging.info("Successfully fetched all subscriber pages from the cloud!", )
SUBSCRIBER_SYNC_SUCCESS_TOTAL.inc()
```

Each Python service on the AGW extends the `MagmaService` class which implements the Service303 interface. This interface has the [`GetMetrics`](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma@v1.6.0/-/blob/orc8r/gateway/python/magma/common/service.py?L403:9) method which uses the [`metrics_export`](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma@v1.6.0/-/blob/orc8r/gateway/python/magma/common/metrics_export.py?L22:5) module to get metrics from the Python Prometheus client and encode them for export over gRPC.

```python
# metrics_export.py

def get_metrics(registry=REGISTRY, verbose=False):
    # ...
    for metric_family in registry.collect():
        if metric_family.type in ('counter', 'gauge'):
            family_proto = encode_counter_gauge(metric_family, timestamp_ms)
    # ...
```

> While each service defines and sets its own metrics, it is up to the _magmad_ service to collect metrics from all services and export them to the Orc8r. When the _magmad_ service gets started, it reads metrics configuration from [magmad.yml](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma@v1.6.0/-/blob/feg/gateway/configs/magmad.yml). Then, _magmad_schedules its [`MetricsCollector`](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma@v1.6.0/-/blob/orc8r/gateway/python/magma/magmad/metrics_collector.py) object to collect and upload metrics every `metrics_config.sync_interval` seconds. The `MetricsCollector` object loops over all Python services and for each, calls `GetMetrics` over gRPC to obtain metrics from the Python service. Then, it divides the gRPC structures into chunks of 1 MB or less, and uploads these chunks to the _metricsd_ Orc8r service over gRPC through the `Collect` method in _metricsd_.

Reviewer: "_magmad_schedules" formatting

func (srv *MetricsControllerServer) Push(ctx context.Context, in *protos.PushedMetricsContainer) (*protos.Void, error) {
    // ...
    metricsExporters, err := metricsd.GetMetricsExporters()
    // ...
    for _, e := range metricsExporters {
        err := e.Submit(metricsToSubmit)
        // ...
    }
```

This is one of the [extensions supported in the Orc8r](orc8r/architecture_modularity) and the label `orc8r.io/metrics_exporter` can be used to export metrics to any data sink. By default, the `GRPCPushExporterServicer`, which is registered in the [`orchestrator`](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma@v1.6.0/-/blob/orc8r/cloud/go/services/orchestrator/orchestrator/main.go?L66) service, is the only metrics exporter. So `GRPCPushExporterServicer`, through its `Submit` method, pushes metrics over gRPC to Prometheus Edge Hub.

```go
// grpc_exporter_servicer.go

func (s *GRPCPushExporterServicer) pushFamilies(families []*io_prometheus_client.MetricFamily) error {
    // ...
    client, err := s.getClient()
    if err != nil {
        return err
    }
    _, err = client.Collect(context.Background(), &edge_hub.MetricFamilies{Families: families})
    // ...
}
```

> [Prometheus Edge Hub](https://github.com/facebookincubator/prometheus-edge-hub) is a Facebook project that replaces the Prometheus Pushgateway. Orc8r's Prometheus service scrapes and drains the Edge Hub so metrics finally arrive at their home in the Prometheus server. On a dev environment, the Prometheus server runs at [localhost:9090](http://localhost:9090).

Reviewer: 1. Add link to the Prometheus scrape targets code I previously sent a link to
2. Add a link for "on a dev environment" to the relevant part of the docker-compose.yml that sets this up

```javascript
// Explorer.js

export default function MetricsExplorer() {
    // ...
    // filter only those metrics which are relevant to this network
    const metricsMap = {};
    if (metricSeries != null) {
        metricSeries.forEach((labelSet: prometheus_labelset) => {
            metricsMap[labelSet['__name__']] = labelSet;
        });
    }
    // ...
}
```

This endpoint is part of the _metricsd_ Orc8r service, and uses the [`QueryRestrictor`](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma@v1.6.0/-/blob/orc8r/cloud/go/services/metricsd/prometheus/restrictor/query_restrictor.go) interface to ensure that only metrics with the right labels (network, gateway etc.) are returned.

```go
// query_restrictor.go

// RestrictQuery appends a label selector to each metric in a given query so
// that only metrics with those labels are returned from the query.
func (q *QueryRestrictor) RestrictQuery(query string) (string, error) {
    // ...
    promQuery, err := promql.ParseExpr(query)
    // ...
    promql.Inspect(promQuery, q.addRestrictorLabels())
    return promQuery.String(), nil
}
```

> Magma provides [dashboards](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma@v1.6.0/-/blob/nms/app/packages/magmalte/grafana) to visualize and explore the collected metrics. In the NMS dashboard > Metrics > Explorer UI, each metric gets a [Grafana](https://grafana.com) `<iframe>` which connects to the Grafana Data Source API. In turn, the Grafana Data Source API proxies the parametrized metric request to Prometheus and displays the retrieved metrics.

Reviewer: parametrized -> parameterized ?

---
id: ref_magma_metrics
title: Life of a Magma Metric
hide_title: true
---

> ## Life of a Magma Metric

Reviewer: Make this an H1

> This document will cover the life of a Magma metric as it originates at the

Reviewer: Formatting nit: *don't* break the lines at 79 chars -- use one paragraph per line, as if you were writing in e.g. google docs

Other norms: https://magma.github.io/magma/docs/next/contributing/contribute_conventions#markdown

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document will cover the life of a metric in a Magma deployment as it originates at the
```

Reviewer: Note: AGW metrics are just one source of metrics. Any gateway can report its own metrics (e.g. CWAG, FeG, etc), Orc8r can originate its own metrics, and Orc8r can scrape metrics from other targets (e.g. AWS or Postgres metrics)

That said, I think your focus (AGW -> Orc8r -> NMS) is still the right way to explain this, but I think adding some context in the intro about what I said above would be helpful for readers

> access gateway (AGW), goes through the orchestrator (orc8r) to the [Prometheus

Reviewer: Throughout:

```suggestion
access gateway (AGW), goes through the orchestrator (Orc8r) to the [Prometheus
```

Edge Hub](https://github.com/facebookincubator/prometheus-edge-hub), and eventually gets displayed on the NMS UI.

> ### Phase 1: Collection and Export

Reviewer: Only "Title Case" the h1 headers, otherwise use "Sentence case"

https://magma.github.io/magma/docs/next/contributing/contribute_conventions#markdown

Reviewer: Make this an H2

> On the AGW, metrics are collected and exported from either Python services or
> C++ services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the AGW, metrics are collected and exported from Python and C++ services.
```

> Every **Python** service on the access gateway defines

Reviewer: Make the Python and C++ sections each their own H3

> [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) Counters, Gauges, and Histograms in a

Reviewer: No need to capitalize Counters, Gauges, Histogram

`metrics.py` file. The `subscriberdb` service, for example, defines the
following Prometheus metrics in its

> [metrics.py](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma/-/blob/lte/gateway/python/magma/subscriberdb/metrics.py)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[metrics.py](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma/-/blob/lte/gateway/python/magma/subscriberdb/metrics.py),
```

file among others:

```python
SUBSCRIBER_SYNC_SUCCESS_TOTAL = Counter(
    'subscriber_sync_success',
    'Total number of successful subscriber'

>     'syncs with cloud',

Reviewer: Here and below: go ahead and just merge these two lines to avoid reader confusion, since we don't care about 80-char line lengths in documentation

)

SUBSCRIBER_SYNC_FAILURE_TOTAL = Counter(
    'subscriber_sync_failure',
    'Total number of failed subscriber'
    'syncs with cloud',
)

```

It is then up to the service to set the values of these metrics appropriately,

> i.e., take the actual measurements. `subscriberdb` increments its

Reviewer: Up to you: I like to stylize services as *subscriberdb* rather than `subscriberdb` -- So e.g. you can also start a sentence with "*Subscriberdb* increments..."

`SUBSCRIBER_SYNC_SUCCESS_TOTAL` counter in its
[client.py](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma/-/blob/lte/gateway/python/magma/subscriberdb/client.py)

> file after fetching subscriber data from the cloud successfully .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
file after fetching subscriber data from the cloud successfully.
```

```python
logging.info(

>     "Successfully fetched all subscriber "

Reviewer: Same here, merge these lines

    "pages from the cloud!",
)
SUBSCRIBER_SYNC_SUCCESS_TOTAL.inc()
```

Each Python service on the AGW extends the `MagmaService` class which implements
the Service303 interface. This interface has the

> [`GetMetrics`](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma/-/blob/orc8r/gateway/python/magma/common/service.py?L403:9)

Reviewer: Throughout: link your refs to a particular git tag (e.g. v1.6, or a particular commit) because otherwise the line numbers can and will change over time and will cause this documentation to go out of date much quicker

method which uses the
[`metrics_export`](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma/-/blob/orc8r/gateway/python/magma/common/metrics_export.py?L22:5)
module to get metrics from the Python Prometheus client and encode them for
export over gRPC.

```python

> for metric_family in registry.collect():

Reviewer: Include the fn signature here, then a `# ...` to indicate there's content between the signature and the lines you're highlighting

    if metric_family.type in ('counter', 'gauge'):
        family_proto = encode_counter_gauge(metric_family, timestamp_ms)

>     ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # ...
```

```

While each service defines and sets its own metrics, it is up to the `magmad`
service to collect metrics from all services and export them to the orc8r. When
the `magmad` service gets started, it reads metrics configuration from
[magmad.yml](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma/-/blob/feg/gateway/configs/magmad.yml).

> Then, `magmad`schedules its [`MetricsCollector`]() object to collect and upload

Reviewer: Formatting

service over gRPC through the `Collect` method in `metricsd`.

```python
chan = ServiceRegistry.get_rpc_channel(
    'metricsd',
    ServiceRegistry.CLOUD,
    grpc_options=self._grpc_options,
)
client = MetricsControllerStub(chan)
...
sample_chunks = self._chunk_samples(samples)
for idx, chunk in enumerate(sample_chunks):
    ...
    future = client.Collect.future(
        metrics_container,
        self.grpc_timeout,
    )
```

In **C++** land, each service also exposes the `GetMetrics` method that the
`magmad` service uses to fetch collected metrics over gRPC. The
[`MetricsSingleton`](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma/-/blob/orc8r/gateway/c/common/service303/MetricsSingleton.cpp)
class provides helpers and wrappers around the Prometheus C++ client.
[`service303.cpp`](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma/-/blob/lte/gateway/c/core/oai/tasks/service303/service303.cpp)
further wraps `MetricsSingleton` methods to make it even more convenient for
Magma services to set and upload Prometheus metrics.

### Phase 2: Orchestrator and Prometheus Edge Hub

The `metricsd` cloud service reads metric names and labels from enums defined in

> [`metricsd.proto`](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma/-/blob/orc8r/protos/metricsd.proto)

Reviewer: Oh no... why do we do it like this? I don't understand why we need to be explicit about enumerating the metric names, at Orc8r, a priori ? cc @ardzoht or @themarwhal lmk if I'm missing something

> and accepts gRPC messages accordingly. Once it has received metrics from the

Reviewer: It's unclear from your wording that the AGW actually makes a gRPC request to the cloud to report the metrics the AGW has aggregated

AGW, it pushes them again over gRPC to the

> [`MetricsExporter`](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma/-/blob/orc8r/cloud/go/services/metricsd/protos/exporter.proto)

Reviewer: Consider noting that this is an extension-based architecture, such that anyone can extend Orc8r with their own metrics sink

https://magma.github.io/magma/docs/next/orc8r/architecture_modularity

> servicers in its `Collect()` method.

Reviewer: Throughout: be uniform about whether you include the `()` in function names. I prefer leaving it out

```go

> metricsExporters, err := metricsd.GetMetricsExporters()

Reviewer: Note somewhere that this is called by metricsd

...
for _, e := range metricsExporters {
	err := e.Submit(metricsToSubmit)
    ...
}
```

With default configuration, `GRPCPushExporterServicer` would be the servicer
registered for `MetricsExporter` which is registered in the
[`orchestrator`](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma/-/blob/orc8r/cloud/go/services/orchestrator/orchestrator/main.go?L66)

> cloud service. Finally, the `GRPCPushExporterServicer`, through its `Submit`

Reviewer: Something like "by default the grpcpushexporter, which is a servicer on the orchestrator service, is the only metrics exporter. ..."

method, pushes metrics over gRPC to their home on Prometheus Edge Hub.

```go

> client, err := s.getClient()

Reviewer: Yeah again, here and throughout: include the fn name at the top of this snippet, and maybe an in-language comment about the snippet's home filename

if err != nil {
    return err
}
_, err = client.Collect(context.Background(), &edge_hub.MetricFamilies{Families: families})
```

The following diagram shows the call flow for the metrics pipeline on the orc8r:

> ![Orc8r Metrics](assets/orc8r/orc8r_metrics.png)

Reviewer: Bring this much closer to the top of the document, if not in the intro. "BLUF" is a good way to go, then fill in the details with words

https://www.internalfb.com/intern/wut/word/?word=bluf

On a dev environment, the Prometheus Edge Hub is running at
[localhost:9090](http://localhost:9090).

> 

Reviewer: Missing a step here: edge-hub is fb's replacement for prometheus push gateway (make a note of this here as well) [0], meaning the Orc8r's prometheus service actually needs to scrape the edge-hub to drain the metrics from edge-hub (basically a target-able cache) into prometheus proper https://github.com/magma/magma/blob/e4088e04e42cc3793bbf88c3bcf71755fa3d7973/orc8r/cloud/helm/orc8r/charts/metrics/templates/prometheus.deployment.yaml#L160-L168

[0] https://github.com/facebookincubator/prometheus-edge-hub

### Phase 3: NMS and Grafana

The NMS initially reads metric names, descriptions and their corresponding
PromQL from
[`LteMetrics.json`](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma/-/blob/nms/app/packages/magmalte/data/LteMetrics.json).
Then, in [`Explorer.js`](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma/-/blob/nms/app/packages/magmalte/app/views/metrics/Explorer.js), it filters relevant metrics for the network in

> question using the `/networks/{network_id}/prometheus/series` orc8r Swagger

Reviewer: The fact that we use swagger is irrelevant to this context

```suggestion
question using the `/networks/{network_id}/prometheus/series` orc8r
```

endpoint.

```javascript
// filter only those metrics which are relevant to this network
const metricsMap = {};
if (metricSeries != null) {
    metricSeries.forEach((labelSet: prometheus_labelset) => {
      metricsMap[labelSet['__name__']] = labelSet;
    });
}
```

This endpoint is part of the `metricsd` orc8r service, and uses the
[`QueryRestrictor`](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/magma/magma/-/blob/orc8r/cloud/go/services/metricsd/prometheus/restrictor/query_restrictor.go)
interface to ensure that only metrics with the right labels (network, gateway
etc.) are returned.

```go
// RestrictQuery appends a label selector to each metric in a given query so
// that only metrics with those labels are returned from the query.
func (q *QueryRestrictor) RestrictQuery(query string) (string, error) {

> 	...

Reviewer: Throughout: when you add an elision indication, always comment it out

```suggestion
	// ...
```

	promQuery, err := promql.ParseExpr(query)
	...
	promql.Inspect(promQuery, q.addRestrictorLabels())
	return promQuery.String(), nil
}

> 

Reviewer: No need for empty newline

```

Finally, in the NMS dashboard > Metrics > Explorer UI, each metric gets a
[Grafana](https://grafana.com/) `<iframe>` which connects to the Grafana Data
Source API. In turn, the Grafana Data Source API proxies the parametrized metric

> request to the Prometheus Edge Hub and displays the retrieved metrics.

Reviewer: These dashboards are actually constructed by us as well -- give a short shoutout to that and include something like https://github.com/magma/magma/tree/c6b85b1f1372bfd0ffd39a061d0459cef3ad9aba/nms/app/packages/magmalte/grafana
